.TH AGENTSANDBOX 1 "2026-04-29" "agentsandbox" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
agentsandbox \- manage a local NixOS VM sandbox
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B agentsandbox
[\fIglobal-options\fR] \fIcommand\fR [\fIcommand-options\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBagentsandbox\fR manages per-workspace Linux VMs built from NixOS templates.
It resolves a configuration directory, derives an instance identity from that
configuration plus hostname, and runs lifecycle/attach operations through
libvirt and SSH.
.P
Some subcommands are listed in CLI help but not yet dispatched by the runtime.
See \fBNOT IMPLEMENTED\fR.
.SH REQUIREMENTS
.TP
Host OS
Linux.
.TP
Required host commands
\fBvirsh\fR, \fBssh\fR, \fBvirtiofsd\fR, \fBunshare\fR.
.TP
Additional for \fBverify\fR
Host \fBnix-store\fR.
.SH GLOBAL OPTIONS
.TP
.B -g, --global
Resolve and operate on the global config
(\fB$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/agentsandbox\fR) instead of local workspace config.
.TP
.BI "-n, --hostname " HOSTNAME
Select sandbox hostname.
.br
Default: \fBdefault\fR.
.TP
.BI "-w, --workspace " PATH
Resolve local config as if invoked from \fIPATH\fR.
.br
Default: current directory.
.SH CONFIG RESOLUTION
Without \fB--global\fR, the tool searches upward from \fB--workspace\fR for
\fB.agentsandbox/flake.nix\fR. If not found, it falls back to global config.
With \fB--global\fR, only global config is used.
.SH COMMANDS
.SS version
Print program version.
.TP
.B agentsandbox version
.SS doctor
Print resolution and dependency diagnostics.
.TP
.B agentsandbox doctor
.SS init
Create template config files.
.TP
.B agentsandbox init
.RS
.TP
.B -f, --force
Overwrite existing files.
.RE
.SS build
Build guest system profile. If guest is down, starts VM temporarily, runs
\fBnixos-rebuild boot\fR, then returns VM to down state.
.TP
.B agentsandbox build
.RS
.TP
.B -b, --bootstrap
Reinstall initial template-based profile before build.
.RE
.SS up
Build and start VM. If already running, runs rebuild in-place; if domain XML
changed, VM restart is required (command reports this).
.TP
.B agentsandbox up
.RS
.TP
.B -d, --detach
Do not attach to guest after rebuild/start.
.RE
.SS down
Request graceful shutdown, then wait for stop state.
.TP
.B agentsandbox down
.SS kill
Forcibly stop VM (\fBvirsh destroy\fR).
.TP
.B agentsandbox kill
.SS destroy
Delete selected host-side instance data. No flags means no file deletion.
.TP
.B agentsandbox destroy
.RS
.TP
.B -s, --system
Remove sysroot.
.TP
.B -d, --data
Remove persistent data.
.TP
.B -l, --logs
Remove state directory (including logs).
.TP
.B -c, --conf
Remove resolved config directory.
.PP
For non-project instance deletion, \fB--global\fR is required.
.PP
Alias: \fBdestory\fR.
.RE
.SS pause
Pause running VMs for all hostnames in the resolved config.
.TP
.B agentsandbox pause
.SS unpause
Resume paused VMs for all hostnames in the resolved config.
.TP
.B agentsandbox unpause
.SS ps
List VM states for all hostnames in the resolved config.
.TP
.B agentsandbox ps
.SS ssh
Run command as guest user \fBvscode\fR, or attach shell if no args.
.TP
.BI "agentsandbox ssh " [args...]
.SS exec
Run command as guest user \fBroot\fR, or attach shell if no args.
.TP
.BI "agentsandbox exec " [args...]
.SS logs
Run guest \fBjournalctl\fR via \fBexec\fR path.
.TP
.BI "agentsandbox logs " [args...]
.br
Default args: \fB-en1000\fR.
.SS stats
Show selected \fBvirsh domstats\fR fields for resolved instances.
.TP
.B agentsandbox stats
.SS wait
Wait until VM state equals one of provided states.
.TP
.BI "agentsandbox wait " [states...]
.br
Default states: \fBdown\fR, \fBshut off\fR, \fBcrashed\fR.
.br
State matching uses raw \fBvirsh domstate\fR text (plus synthetic
\fBdown\fR when domain is absent).
.SS mount
Add/update mount entry, or print \fBmounts\fR file if no args.
.TP
.BI "agentsandbox mount " [path] [name]
.br
\fIpath\fR may be file or directory.
.SS unmount
Remove mount entry for \fIpath\fR.
.TP
.BI "agentsandbox unmount " path
.SS verify
Run store/system repair checks.
.TP
.B agentsandbox verify
.br
1) Runs host \fBnix-store --verify --check-contents --repair\fR against guest
store root.
.br
2) If guest is running, runs guest
\fBnixos-rebuild build --repair --flake /persistent/etc/nixos#<hostname>\fR.
.SH KNOWN LIMITATIONS
.TP
Undispatched commands in CLI
\fBport\fR, \fBallow-domain\fR, \fBunallow-domain\fR, \fBproxy-logs\fR.
.TP
SSH attach prerequisites
\fBssh\fR/\fBexec\fR require guest \fBtcp/22\fR to be covered by resolved
\fBport-forwards\fR data.
.TP
Host nix dependency
When \fBflake.lock\fR is missing, \fBbuild\fR/\fBup\fR call host \fBnix flake lock\fR.
.TP
Verify running-state requirement
\fBverify\fR fails after store verification if guest is not running.
.SH NOT IMPLEMENTED
These commands are visible in CLI help but currently fall through to a generic
placeholder path:
.TP
.B port
Port mapping query.
.TP
.B allow-domain
Outbound domain allow rule add.
.TP
.B unallow-domain
Outbound domain allow rule remove.
.TP
.B proxy-logs
MITM proxy log follow.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
The following environment variables are used for path resolution:
.TP
\fBHOME\fR
Fallback root for XDG directories.
.TP
\fBXDG_CONFIG_HOME\fR, \fBXDG_DATA_HOME\fR, \fBXDG_STATE_HOME\fR, \fBXDG_RUNTIME_DIR\fR
Base paths for config/data/state/runtime roots.
.SH FILES
.TP
\fI<workspace>/.agentsandbox/\fR
Local config directory created by \fBinit\fR.
.TP
\fI$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/agentsandbox/\fR
Global config directory.
.TP
\fI<config>/mounts\fR
Mount entry source of truth.
.TP
\fI<config>/allowed_hosts\fR
Outbound policy input file.
.TP
\fI<config>/machine-prefix\fR
Instance identity prefix seed.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
0
Success.
.TP
1
Error.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Initialize local config:
.nf
agentsandbox init
.fi
.TP
Build then start:
.nf
agentsandbox build
agentsandbox up
.fi
.TP
Run command in guest:
.nf
agentsandbox exec -- uname -a
.fi
.TP
Add and remove mount entry:
.nf
agentsandbox mount ./alpha sandbox-alpha
agentsandbox unmount ./alpha
.fi
.SH SEE ALSO
virsh(1), ssh(1), journalctl(1), nixos-rebuild(8)
